 MACBETH

                                      by

                              WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE



                              PERSONS REPRESENTED

 DUNCAN,    King of Scotland.          Seyton, an officer attending on MACBETH.
 MALCOM,    Son of DUNCAN.             Boy, Son to MACDUFF.
 DONALBAIN, Son of DUNCAN.             An English Doctor.  A Scotch Doctor.
 MACBETH,   General of DUNCAN'S Army.  A Soldier.  A Porter.  An Old Man.
 BANQUO,    General of DUNCAN'S Army.
 MACDUFF,   Nobleman of Scotland.      LADY MACBETH.
 LENOX,     Nobleman of Scotland.      LADY MACDUFF.
 ROSS,      Nobleman of Scotland.      Gentlewomen attending on LADY MACBETH.
 MENTETH,   Nobleman of Scotland.      HECATE, and the three Witches.
 ANGUS,     Nobleman of Scotland.
 CATHNESS,  Nobleman of Scotland.      Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers,
 FLEANCE,   Son to BANQUO.             Murderers, Attendants, and Messengers.
 SIWARD,    Earl of Northumberland,
 and  General of the English Forces.   The GHOST of BANQUO, and several other
 YOUNG SIWARD, his Son.                APPARITIONS.

 Scene, - In the end of the Fourth Act, in ENGLAND; through the rest of the
          Play, in SCOTLAND; and chiefly at MACBETH'S Castle.


                                    ACT I.


                                   SCENE i.

                    An open Place.  Thunder and Lightning.

                            Enter three Witches.


111     I Witch    When shall we three meet again,
                   In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
        2 Witch    When the hurlyburly's done,
                   When the battle's lost and won.
        3 Witch    That will be ere the set of sun.
        I Witch    Where the place?
        2 Witch                     Upon the heath.
        3 Witch    There to meet with Macbeth
        I Witch    I come, Graymalkin!
            All    Paddock calls: -Anon!-
1110               Fair is foul, and foul is fair:
                   Hover through the fog and filthy air.

                             Witches vanish.


                               Scene ii.

                          A Camp near Forres

          Alarum within.  Enter King Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain,
            Lenox, with Attendants, meeting a bloody Soldier.


121      Duncan    What bloody man is that?  He can report,
                   As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
                   The newest state.
        Malcolm                      This is the sergeant,
                   Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
                   'Gainst my captivity. - Hail, brave friend!
                   Say to the king the knowledge of the broil,
                   As thou didst leave it.
        Soldier                            Doubtfully it stood;
                   As two spent swimmers that do cling together
                   And choke their art.  The merciless Macdonwald,-
1210               Worthy to be a rebel - for to that
                   The multiplying villanies of nature
                   Do swarm upon him, - from the Western isles
                   Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
                   And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
                   Showed like a rebel's whore.  But all's too weak
                   For brave Macbeth, - well he deserves that name, -
                   Disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel,
                   Which smoked with bloody execution,
                   Like valour's minion, Carved out his passage
1220               Till he faced the slave;
                   And ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
                   Till he unseamed him from the nave to the chaps,
                   And fixed his head upon our battlements.
        Duncan     O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!
       Soldier     As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
                   Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break;
                   So from that spring, whence comfort seemed to come,
                   Discomfort swells.  Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
                   No sooner justice had, with valour armed,
1230               Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
                   But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
                   With furbished arms and new supplies of men,
                   Began a fresh assault.
        Duncan                            Dismayed not this
                   Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
       Soldier                                       Yes;
                   As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
                   If I say sooth, I must report they were
                   As cannons overcharged with double cracks;
                   So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:
1240               Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
                   Or memorize another Golgotha,
                   I cannot tell:--
                   But I am faint; my gashes cry for help.
        Duncan     So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
                   They smack of honour both.--Go, get him surgeons.

                              Exit Soldier, attended.

                   Who comes here?
       Malcolm                     The worthy Thane of Ross.
         Lenox     What a haste looks through his eyes!
                   So should he look that seems to speak things strange.

                                  Enter Ross.

          Ross     God save the king!
        Duncan                        Whence cam'st thou, worthy thane?
1250      Ross     From Fife, great king;
                   Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
                   And fan our people cold.
                   Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
                   Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
                   The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict;
                   Till that Belladona's bridegroom, lapped in proof,
                   Confronted him with self-comparisons,
                   Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm,
                   Curbing his lavish spirit; and, to conclude,
                   The victory fell on us.
1260    Duncan                             Great happiness!
          Ross     That now Sweno, the Norway's king, craves composition;
                   Nor would we deign him burial of his men
                   Till he disbursed, at Saint Colmes-inch,
                   Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
        Duncan     No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
                   Our bosom interest:--go pronounce his present death,
                   And with his former title greet Macbeth
          Ross     I'll see it done.
1270    Duncan     What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.

                                  Exeunt.



                                 Scene iii.

                                  A Heath.

                      Thunder.  Enter the three Witches.


131    I Witch     Where hath thou been, sister?
       2 Witch     Killing swine.
       3 Witch     Sister, where thou?
       1 Witch     A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
                   And munched, and munched, and munched:
                   --Give me, quoth I:
                   Aroint thee, witch! the rump-fed ronyon cries.
                   Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger:
                   But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
                   And, like a rat without a tail,
1310               I'll do, I'll do, I'll do.
       2 Witch     I'll give thee a wind.
       I Witch     Thou art kind.
       3 Witch     And I another.
       I Witch     I myself have all the other;
                   And the very ports they blow,
                   All the quarters that they know
                   I' the shipman's card.
                   I will drain him dry as hay:
                   Sleep shall neither night nor day
1320               Hang upon his pent-house lid;
                   He shall live a man forbid:
                   Weary seven-nights nine times nine
                   Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine:
                   Though his bark cannot be lost,
                   Yet it shall be tempest-tost.--
                   Look what I have.
       2 Witch     Show me, show me.
       I Witch     Here I have a pilot's thumb,
                   Wrecked as homeword he did come.

                            Drum within.

1330   3 Witch     A drum, A drum!
                   Macbeth doth come.
           All     The weird sisters, hand in hand,
                   Posters of sea and land,
                   Thus do go about, about:
                   Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
                   Peace!--the charm's wound up.

                         Enter Macbeth and Banquo

       Macbeth     So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
        Banquo     How far is't call's Forres?--What are these,
1340               So withered, and so wild in their attire,
                   That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
                   And yet are on't?--Live you? or are you aught
                   That man may question?  You seem to understand me,
                   By each at once her chappy finger laying
                   Upon her skinny lips:--you should be women,
                   And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
                   That you are so.
       Macbeth                      Speak if you can;--what are you?
       1 Witch     All hail, Macbeth!  hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
       2 Witch     All hail, Macbeth!  hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
1350   3 Witch     All hail, Macbeth!  that thou shalt be king hereafter!
        Banquo     Good sir, why do you start; and seem to fear
                   Things that do sound so fair?--I' the name of truth,
                   Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
                   Which outwardly ye show?  My noble partner
                   You greet with present grace and great prediction
                   Of noble having and of royal hope.
                   That he seems rapt withal:--to me you speak not:
                   If you can look into the seeds of time,
                   And say which grain will grow, and which will not,
1360               Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
                   Your favours nor your hate.
       I Witch     Hail!
       2 Witch     Hail!
       3 Witch     Hail!
       I Witch     Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.
       2 Witch     Not so happy, yet much happier.
       3 Witch     Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none;
                   So, all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
       I Witch     Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
1370   Macbeth     Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more:
                   By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Clamis;
                   But how of Cawdor? the Thane of Cawdor lives,
                   A prosperous gentleman; and to be king
                   Stands not within the prospect of belief,
                   No more than to be Cawdor.  Say from whence
                   You owe this strange intelligence? or why
                   Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
                   With such prophetic greeting?--Speak, I charge you!

                              Witches vanish.

        Banquo     The earth hath bubbles, as the waters has,
1380               And these are of them:--wither are they vanished?
       Macbeth     Into the air; and what seemed corporeal melted
                   As breath into the wind.--Would they had stayed
        Banquo     Where such things here as we do speak about?
                   Or have we eaten on the insane root
                   That takes the reason prisoner?
       Macbeth     Your children shall be kings.
        Banquo                                   You shall be king.
       Macbeth     And Thane of Cawdor too; went it not so?
        Banquo     To the self-same tune and words.  Who's here?

                         Enter Ross and Angus

          Ross     The king hath happily received, Macbeth,
1390               The news of thy success: and, when he reads
                   Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
                   His wonders and his praises do contend
                   Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,
                   In viewing o'er the rest o' the self-same day,
                   He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
                   Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
                   Strange images of death.  As thick as hail
                   Came post with post; and every one did bear
                   Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense,
                   And pored them down before him.
13100    Angus                                      We are sent
                   To give thee, from our royal master, thanks;
                   Only to herald thee into his sight,
                   Not pay thee.
          Ross     And, for an earnest of a greater honour,
                   He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor:
                   In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
                   For it is thine.
        Banquo                       What, can the devil speak true?
       Macbeth     The Thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me
                   In borrowed robes?
         Angus                         Who was the thane lives yet;
13110              But under heavy judgment bears that life
                   Which he deserves to lose.  Whether he was combined
                   With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
                   With hidden help and vantage, or with both
                   He laboured in his country's wreck, I know not;
                   But treasons capital, confessed, and proved,
                   Have overthrown him.
       Macbeth                          Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor;
                   The greatest is behind [aside]. -Thanks for your pains.-
                   Do you not hope your children shall be kings,
                   When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
                   Promised no less to them?
13120   Banquo                               That, trusted home,
                   Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
                   Besides the Thane of Cawdor.  But 'tis strange:
                   And oftentimes to win us to our harm,
                   The instruments of darkness tell us truths;
                   Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
                   In deepest consequence.--
                   Cousins, a word I pray you.
       Macbeth                                  Two truths are told,
                   As happy prologues to the swelling act
                   Of the imerial theme [aside].--I thank you, gentlemen.-
13130              [aside] This supernatural soliciting
                   Cannot be ill; cannot be good:--if ill,
                   Why hath it given me earnest of suggest,
                   Commencing in a truth?  I am Thane of Cawdor:
                   If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
                   whose horrid image doth unfix my hair,
                   And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
                   Against the use of nature?  Present fears
                   Are less than horrible imaginings:
                   My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
13140              Shakes so my single state of man, that function
                   Is smothered in surmise; and nothing is
                   But what is not.
        Banquo                      Look, how our partner's rapt.
       Macbeth     [Aside.]
                   If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me,
                   Without my stir.
        Banquo                       New honours come upon him,
                   Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
                   But with the aid of use.
       Macbeth     [Aside.]                  Come what come may,
                   Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
        Banquo     Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
       Macbeth     Give me your favour:--my dull brain was wrought
13150              With things forgotten.  Kind gentlemen, your pains
                   are registered where everyday I turn
                   The leaf to read them.--Let us toward the king.--
                   Think upon what hath chanced; and, at more time,
                   The interim having weighed it, let us speak
                   Our free hearts to each other.
        Banquo                                     Very gladly.
       Macbeth     Till then, enough.--Come, friends.

                                  Exeunt.



                                  Scene iv

                                   Forres.

                            A room in the Palace.

                  Flourish.  Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain,
                            Lenox and Attendants.


141     Duncan     Is execution done on Cawdor?  Are not
                   Those in commission yet returned?
       Malcolm                                       My liege,
                   They are not yet come back.  But I have spoke
                   With one that saw him die: who did report,
                   That very frankly he confessed his treasons;
                   Implored your highness' pardon; and set forth
                   A deep repentance: nothing in his life
                   Became him like the leaving it; he died
                   As one that had been studied in his death,
1410               To throw away the dearest thing he owed,
                   As 'twere a careless trifle.
        Duncan                                   There's no art
                   To find the mind's construction in the face:
                   He was a gentleman on whom I built
                   An absolute trust.-

                 Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus.

                                        O worthiest cousin!
                   The sin of my ingratitude even now
                   Was heavy on me: thou art so far before,
                   That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
                   To overtake thee.  Would thou hadst less deserved;
                   That the proportion both of thanks and payment
1420               Might have been mine! only I have left to say,
                   More is thy due than more than all can pay.
       Macbeth     The service and the royalty I owe,
                   In doing it, pays itself.   Your Highness?  part
                   Is to receive our duties: and our duties
                   Are to your throne and state children and servants;
                   Which do but what they should, by doing everything
                   Safe toward your love and honour.
        Duncan                                        Welcome hither:
                   I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
                   To make thee full of growing.--Noble Banquo,
1430               That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
                   No less to have done so, let me infold thee,
                   And hold thee to my heart.
        Banquo                                There if I grow,
                   The harvest is your own.
        Duncan                              My plenteous joys,
                   Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves
                   In drops of sorow.--Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
                   And you whose places are the nearest, know,
                   We will establish our estate upon
                   Our dearest, Malcolm; whom we name hereafter
                   The Prince of Cumberland: which honour must
1440               Not unaccompanied invest him only,
                   But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
                   On all deservers.--From hence to Inverness,
                   And bind us further to you.
       Macbeth     The rest is labour, which is not used for you:
                   I'll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful
                   The hearing of my wife with your approach;
                   So, humbly take my leave.
        Duncan                               My worthy Cawdor!
       Macbeth     [Aside] The Prince of Cumberland!--That is a step,
                   In which I must fall down, or else o'er leap
1450               For in my way it lies.  Stars, hide your fires!
                   Let not light see my black and deep desires:
                   The wink at the hand! yet let that be,
                   Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.

                                    Exit.

        Duncan     True. worthy Banquo,--he is full so valiant;
                   And in his commendations I am fed,--
                   It is a banquet to me.  Let us after him,
                   Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
                   It is a peerless kinsman.

                                 Flourish.  Exeunt.



                                    Scene v

                                  Inverness.

                          A room in Macbeth's Castle.

                     Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter.


151  L. Macbeth    "They met me in the day of success; and I have learned
                   by the perfectest report, they have more in them than
                   mortal knowledge.  When I burned in desire to question
                   them further, they made themselves air, into which they
                   vanished.  While I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came
                   missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of
                   Cawdor'; by which title, before, these weird sisters
                   saluted me, and referred me to the coming-on of time,
                   with 'Hail, king that shalt be!'  This have I thought
                   good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness,
                   that thou might'st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by
1510               being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee.  Lay
                   it to thy heart, and farewell."

                   Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be
                   What thou art promised.--Yet do I fear thy nature:
                   It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
                   To catch the nearest way.  Thou wouldst be great;
                   Art not without ambition, but without
                   The illness that should attend it: what thou wouldst highly,
                   That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
1520               And yet wouldst wrongly win; thou'dst have, great Glamis,
                   That which cries, "Thus thou must do, if thou have it";
                   And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
                   Than wishest should be undone.  Hie thee hither,
                   That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
                   And chatise with the valour of my tongue
                   All that impedes thee from the golden round,
                   Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
                   To have thee crowned withal.--

                               Enter a Messenger

                                                    What is your tidings?
      Messenger    The king comes here tonight.
   Lady Macbeth                                 Thou'rt mad to say it.
1530               Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
                   Would have informed for preparation.
      Messenger    So please you, it is true; our thane is coming;
                   One of the fellows had the speed of him,
                   Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
                   Than would make up his message.
   Lady Macbeth                                    Give him tending:

                                Exit Messenger

                   He brings great news.  The raven himself is hoarse
                   That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
                   Under my battlements.  Come you spirits
                   That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
1540               And fill me, from the crown to the toe, top-full
                   Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood,
                   Stop up th' access and passage of remorse;
                   That no compunctious visitings of nature
                   Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
                   Th' effect and it!  Come to my woman's breasts,
                   And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers,
                   Wherever in your sightless substances
                   You wait on nature's mischief!  Come, thick night,
                   And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
1550               That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
                   Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
                   To cry, "Hold, hold!"

                                 Enter Macbeth

                                            Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor!
                   Greater than both, by the all-hail, hereafter!
                   Thy letters have transported me beyond
                   This ignorant present, and I feel now
                   The future in an instant.
        Macbeth                               My dearest love,
                   Duncan comes here tonight.
   Lady Macbeth                                And when goes hence?
        Macbeth    Tomorrow, as he purposes.
   Lady Macbeth                               O! never
                   Shall sun that morrow see!
1560               Your face, my thane, is as a book, where men
                   May read strange matters.  To beguile the time,
                   Look like the time, bear welcome in your eye
                   Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower
                   But be the serpent under 't.  He that's coming
                   Must be provided for;  and you shall put
                   This night's great business into my despatch;
                   Which shall to all our nights and days to come
                   Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
        Macbeth    We will speak further.
   Lady Macbeth                           Only look up clear;
1570               To alter favour ever is to  fear.
                   Leave all the rest to me.



                                   Scene vi

                         The same. Before the castle.

                             Hautboys and torches.

               Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Banquo, Lenox,
                     Macduff, Ross, Angus, and Attendants.


161      Duncan    This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
                   Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
                   Unto our gentle senses.
         Banquo                            This guest of summer,
                   The temple-haunting martlet, doth approve,
                   By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath
                   Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,
                   Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
                   Hath made his pendent bed, and procreat cradle:
                   Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed
                   The air is delicate.

                              Enter Lady Macbeth

1610                                      See, see! our honoured hostess.--
                   The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
                   Which still we thank as love.  Herein I teach you,
                   How you shall bid God yield us for your pains,
                   And thank us for your trouble.
   Lady Macbeth                                    All our service,
                   In every point twice done, and done double,
                   Were poor and single business to contend
                   Against those honours deep and broad, wherewith
                   Your majesty loads our house: for those of old,
                   And the late dignities heaped up to them,
                   We rest your hermits.
1620     Duncan                           Where's the Thane of Cawdor?
                   We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose
                   To be his purveyor: but he rides well;
                   And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
                   To his home before us.  Fair and noble hostess,
                   We are your guest tonight.
   Lady Macbeth                                Your servants ever
                   Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
                   To make their audit at your highness' pleasure,
                   Shall to return your own.
         Duncan                               Give me your hand;
                   Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly,
1630               And shall continue our graces towards him.
                   By your leave, hostess.



                                   Scene vii

                        The same. A room in the castle.

                             Hautboys and torches
                   Enter, and pass over the stage, a Sewer,
                 and divers Servants with dishes and service.

                              Then enter Macbeth.

                   [Aside]
171     Macbeth    If it were done when 't is done, then 't were well
                   It were done quickly: if the assassination
                   Could trammel up the consequence, and catch
                   With his surcease success; that but this blow
                   Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
                   But here upon this bank and shoal of time,
                   We 'd jump the life to come. --But in these cases,
                   We still have judgement here, that we but teach
                   Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
1710               To plague th' inventor: this even-handed justice
                   Commends th' ingredients of our poisoned chalice
                   To our own lips.  He 's here in double trust:
                   First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
                   Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
                   Who should against his murderer shut the door,
                   Not bear the knife myself.  Besides, this Duncan
                   Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
                   So clear in his great office, that his virtues
                   Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
1720               The deep damnation of his taking-off;
                   And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
                   Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin, horsed
                   Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
                   Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
                   That tears shall drown the wind. --I have no spur
                   To prick the sides of my intent, but only
                   Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
                   And falls on the other --

                              Enter Lady Macbeth

                                              How now! what news?
   Lady Macbeth    He has almost supped.  Why have you left the chamber?
        Macbeth    Hath he asked for me?
   Lady Macbeth                           Know you not he has?             1730
        Macbeth    We will proceed no further in this business:
                   He hath honoured me of late; and I have bought
                   Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
                   Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
                   Not cast aside so soon.
   Lady Macbeth                             Was the hope drunk,
                   Wherein you dressed yourself? hath it slept since,
                   And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
                   At what it did so freely?  From this time
                   Such I account thy love.  Art thou afeard
1740               To be the same in thine own act and valour,
                   As thou art in desire?  Wouldst thou have that
                   Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life,
                   And live a coward in thine own esteem,
                   Letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would,"
                   Like the poor cat i' the adage?
        Macbeth                                     Pr'ythee, peace.
                   I dare do all that may become a man;
                   Who dares do more is none.
   Lady Macbeth                                What beast was 't then
                   That made you break this enterprise to me?
                   When you durst do it, then you were a man;
1750               And, to be more that what you were, you would
                   Be so much more the man.  Nor time nor place
                   Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:
                   They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
                   Does unmake you.  I have given suck, and know
                   How tender  't is to love the babe that milks me:
                   I would, while it was smiling in my face,
                   Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums,
                   And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you
                   Have done to this.
        Macbeth                        If we should fail, --
   Lady Macbeth                                               We fail!
1760               But screw your courage to the sticking-place
                   And we 'll not fail.  When Duncan is asleep
                   (Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey
                   Soundly invite him), his two chamberlains
                   Will I with wine and wassail so convince,
                   That memory, the warder of the brain,
                   Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason,
                   A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep
                   Their drenched natures lie, as in death,
                   What cannot you and I perform upon
1770               Th' unguarded Duncan?  What not put upon
                   His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
                   Of our great quell?
        Macbeth                        Bring forth men-children only!
                   For thy undaunted mettle should compose
                   Nothing but males.  Will it not be received,
                   When we have marked with blood those sleepy two
                   Of his own chamber, and used their very daggers,
                   That they have done 't?
   Lady Macbeth                             Who dares receive it other,
                   As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar
                   Upon his death?
1780    Macbeth                     I am settled, and bend up
                   Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
                   Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
                   False face must hide what the false heart doth know.

                                    Exeunt.





                                    ACT II

                                    Scene I

                     The same.  A court within the castle

              Enter Banquo, and Fleance with a torch before him.



211      Banquo     How goes the night, boy?
        Fleance     The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.
         Banquo     And she goes down at twelve.
        Fleance                                   I take 't, 't is later, Sir.
         Banquo     Hold, take my sword.--There 's husbandry in heaven;
                    Their candles are all out.--Take thee that, too.
                    A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
                    And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers!
                    Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
                    Gives way to in repose!--Give me my sword.

                  Enter Macbeth, and a Servant with a torch.

2110                Who 's there?
        Macbeth                    A friend.
         Banquo     What, Sir! not yet at rest?  The king 's a-bed:
                    He hath been in unusual pleasure, and
                    Sent forth great largess to your offices.
                    This diamond he greets your wife withal,
                    By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
                    In measureless content.
        Macbeth                              Being unprepared,
                   Our will became the servant to defect,
                   Which else should free have wrought.
         Banquo                                           All 's well.
2120               I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:
                   To you they have showed some truth.
        Macbeth                                         I think not of them:
                   Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
                   We would spend it in some words upon that business,
                   If you would grant the time.
         Banquo                                  At your kind'st leisure.
        Macbeth    If you shall cleave to my consent, when 't is,
                   It shall make honour for you.
         Banquo                                   So I lose none
                   In seeking to augment it, but still keep
                   My bosom franchised, and allegiance clear,
                   I shall be counselled.
        Macbeth                           Good repose the while!
2130     Banquo    Thanks, Sir: the like to you.

                           Exeunt Banquo and Fleance

                               [To the servant]

        Macbeth    Go, bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
                   She strike upon the bell.  Get thee to bed.--

                                 Exit Servant

                   Is this a dagger which I see before me,
                   The handle toward my hand?  Come let me clutch thee:--
                   I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
                   Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
                   To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
                   A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
                   Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
2140               I see thee yet, in form as palpable
                   As this which now I draw.
                   Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going;
                   And such an instrument I was to use.--
                   Mine eyes are made the fools o' the senses,
                   Or else worth all the rest;  I see thee still;
                   And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,
                   Which was not so before.--There 's no such thing.
                   It is the bloody business which informs
                   Thus to mine eyes.--Now o'er the half world
2150               Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
                   The curtained sleep: witchcraft celebrates
                   Pale Hecate's offerings; and withered Murder,
                   Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf,
                   Whose howl 's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
                   With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
                   Moves like a ghost.--Thou sure and firm-set earth,
                   Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
                   Thy very stones prate of my where-about,
                   And take the present horror from the time,
2160               Which now suits with it.  Whiles I threat, he lives:
                   Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

                                 A bell rings

                   I go, and it is done: the bell invites me.
                   Hear it not, Duncan; for it is a knell
                   That summons thee to heaven to to hell.

                                                                                Exit




                                    Scene ii

                                    The same.

                               Enter Lady Macbeth.

221Lady Macbeth    That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold.
                   What hath quenched them hath given me fire.--Hark!--Peace!
                   It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman,
                   Which gives the stern'st good-night.  He is about it.
                   The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
                   Do mock their charge with snores.  I have drugged their
                   That death and nature do contend about them,       [possets,
                   Whether they live or die.

                   [Within]
        Macbeth                                Who's there?--what, ho!
   Lady Macbeth    Alack!  I am afraid they have awaked,
2210               And 't is not done:--th' attempt, and not the deed,
                   Confounds us.--Hark!--I laid their daggers ready;
                   He could not miss them.--Had he not resembled
                   My father as he slept, I had done 't.--My husband!

                                 Enter Macbeth

        Macbeth    I have done the deed.--Didst thou not hear a noise?
   Lady Macbeth    I heard the owl scream, and the crickets cry.
                   Did you not speak?
        Macbeth                        When?
   Lady Macbeth                               Now.
        Macbeth                                      As I descended?
   Lady Macbeth    Ay.
        Macbeth    Hark!--
                            Who lies i' the second chamber?
   Lady Macbeth                                              Donalbain.
2220    Macbeth    This is a sorry sight.  [Looking at his hands]
   Lady Macbeth    A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
        Macbeth    There 's one did laugh in  's sleep, and one cried, "Murder!"
                   That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them;
                   But they did say their prayers, and addressed them
                   Again to sleep.
   Lady Macbeth                     There are two lodged together.
        Macbeth    One cried, "God bless us!" and, "Amen," the other,
                   As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
                   Listening their fear, I could not say, "Amen,"
                   When they did say, "God bless us!"
   Lady Macbeth                                       Consider it not so deeply.
2230    Macbeth    But wherefore could not I pronounce "Amen"?
                   I had most need of blessing, and "Amen"
                   Stuck in my throat.
   Lady Macbeth                         These deeds must not be thought
                   After these ways: so, it will make us mad.
        Macbeth    Methought I heard a voice cry, "Sleep no more!
                   Macbeth does murder sleep,"--the innocent sleep;
                   Sleep, that knits up the ravelled sleave of care,
                   The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath,
                   Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
                   Chief nourisher in life's feast;--
   Lady Macbeth                                        What do you mean?
2240    Macbeth    Still it cried, "Sleep not more!" to all the house:
                   "Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore Cawdor
                   Shall sleep no more, Macbeth shall sleep no more!"
   Lady Macbeth    Who was it that thus cried?  Why, worthy thane,
                   You do unbend your nobel strength, to think
                   So brainsickly of things.  Go, get some water,
                   And wash this filthy witness from your hand.--
                   Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
                   They must lie there; go, carry them, and smear
                   The sleepy grooms with blood.
        Macbeth                                   I'll go no more:
2250               I am afraid to think what I have done;
                   Look on 't again I dare not.
   Lady Macbeth                                  Infirm of purpose!
                   Give me the daggers.  The sleeping and the dead
                   Are but as pictures; 't is the eye of childhood
                   That fears a painted devil.  If he do bleed,
                   I 'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
                   For it must seem their guilt.

                            Exit.  Knocking within.

        Macbeth    Whence is that knocking?--
                   How is 't with me, when every noise appals me?
                   What hands are here? Ha! they pluck out mine eyes.
                   Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
2260               Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
                   The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
                   Making the green one red.

                             Re-enter Lady Macbeth

   Lady Macbeth    My hands are of your colour; But I shame
                   To wear a heart so white. [Knock] I hear a knocking
                   At the south entry: retire we to our chamber.
                   A little water clears us of this deed:
                   How easy is it then!  Your constancy
                   Hath left you unattended.--[Knock] Hark! more knocking.
                   Get on your night-gown, lest occasion call us,
2270               And show us to be watchers.--Be not lost
                   So poorly in your thoughts.
        Macbeth    To know my deed, 't were best not know myself.  [Knock]
                   Wake Duncan with thy knocking: I would thou couldst!

                                    Exeunt



                                   Scene iii

                                   The same.

                                Enter a Porter.


231      Porter    Here 's a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of
                   hell-gate, he should have old turning the key.
                   [Knocking]  Knock, knock, knock.  Who 's there,
                   i' the name of Belzebub?--Here 's a farmer that
                   hanged himself on the expectation of plenty: come
                   in time; have napkins enough about you; here you 'll
                   sweat for 't. [Knocking] Knock, knock.  Who 's there,
                   i' the other devil's name?--'Faith, here's an
                   equivocator that could swear in both the scales
                   against either scale; who committed treason enough
                   for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven:
2310               O! come in, equivocator. [Knocking] Knock, knock,
                   knock. Who 's there?--'Faith, here 's an English tailor
                   come hither for stealing out of a French hose: come in,
                   tailor; here you may rest your goose. [Knocking] Knock,
                   knock.  Never at quiet? What are you?--But this place is
                   too cold for hell. I 'll devil-porter it no further:
                   I had thought to have let in some of all professions
                   that go the primrose way to the ever-lasting bonfire.
                   [Knocking] Anon, anon: I pray you, remember the porter.

                                Opens the gate.

        Macduff    Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
2320               That you do lie so late?
         Porter    'Faith, Sir, we were carousing till the second cock;
                   And drink, Sir, is a geat provoker of three things.
        Macduff    What three things does drink especially provoke?
         Porter    Marry, Sir, nose-painting, sleep and urine.  Lechery,
                   Sir, it provokes and unprovokes: it provokes the desire,
                   but it takes away the performance.  Therefore, much drink
                   may be said to be an equivocator with lechery: it makes
                   him and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off;
                   it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to,
                   and not stand to: in conclusion, equivocates him in a
2330               sleep, and, giving him the lie leaves him.
        Macduff    I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
         Porter    That it did, Sir, i' the very throat o' me: but I requited
                   him for his lie; and, I think, being too strong for him,
                   though he took up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to
                   cast him.
        Macduff    Is thy master stirring?
         Porter    Our knocking has awaked him; here he comes.

                                 Enter Macbeth

          Lenox    Good morrow, noble Sir!
        Macbeth                             Good morrow, both!
        Macduff    Is the king stirring, worthy thane?
2340    Macbeth                                          Not yet.
        Macduff    He did command me to call timely on him:
                   I have almost slipped the hour.
        Macbeth                                     I 'll bring you to him.
        Macduff    I know this is a joyful trouble to you;
                   But yet  't is one.
        Macbeth                        The labour we delight in physics pain.
                   This is the door.
        Macduff                       I 'll make so bold to call.
                   For 't is my limited service.

                                 Exit Macduff

          Lenox    Goes the king hence today?
        Macduff                                 He does:--he did appoint so.
          Lenox    The night has been unruly: where we lay,
2350               Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say,
                   Lamentings heard i' the air; strange creams of death,
                   And prophesying with accents terrible
                   Of dire combustion, and confused events,
                   New hatched to the woeful time.
                   The obscure bird clamoured the livelong night:
                   Some say the earth was feverous, and did shake.
        Macbeth    'T was a rough night.
          Lenox    My young remembrance cannot parallel
                   A fellow to it.

                               Re-enter Macduff

2360    Macduff    O horror! horror! horror!  Tongue, nor heart,
                   Cannot conceive, nor name thee!
Macbeth and Lenox                                   What's the matter?
        Macduff    Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!
                   Most sacrilegious murder hath broke open
                   The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence
                   The life o' the building!
        Macbeth                               What is 't you say? the life?
          Lenox    Mean you his majesty?
        Macduff    Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
                   With a new Gorgon.--Do not bed me speak:
                   See, and then speak yourselves.--

                           Exeunt Macbeth and Lenox

                                                        Awake! Awake!--
2370               Ring the alarum-bell.--Murder and treason!
                   Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!
                   Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
                   And look on death itself!--up, up, and see
                   The great doom's image!--Malcolm! Banquo!
                   As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites
                   To countenance this horror!  Ring the bell.

                                  Bell rings

                              Enter Lady Macbeth

   Lady Macbeth    What's the business,
                   That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
2380               The sleepers of the house? speak, speak!
        Macduff                                              O gentle lady,
                   'T is not for you to hear what I can speak:
                   The repetition, in a woman's ear,
                   Would murder as it fell.

                                 Enter Banquo

                                              O Banquo! Banquo!
                   Our royal master 's murdered!
   Lady Macbeth                                    Woe, alas!
                   What! in our house?
         Banquo                         Too cruel anywhere.
                   Dear Duff, I pr'ythee, contradict thyself,
                   And say it is not so.

                         Re-enter Macbeth and Lenox

        Macbeth    Had I but died an hour before this chance,
                   I had lived a blessed time; for, from this instant,
                   There 's nothing serious inmortality;
2390               All is but toys: renown, and grace, is dead;
                   The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
                   Is left this vault to brag of.

                          Enter Malcolm and Donalbain

      Donalbain    What is amiss?
        Macbeth                     You are, and do not know 't:
                   The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
                   Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.
        Macduff    Your royal father 's murdered.
        Malcolm                                     O! by whom?
          Lenox    Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done 't:
                   Their hands and faces were all badged with blood;
                   So were their daggers, which, unwiped, we found
23100              Upon their pillows:
                   They stared, and were distracted; no man's life
                   Was to be trusted with them.
        Macbeth    O! yet I do repent me of my fury
                   That I did kill them.
        Macduff                            Wherefore did you so?
        Macbeth    Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,
                   Loyal and neutral, in a moment?  No man:
                   The expedition of my violent love
                   Outran the pauser reason.--Here lay Duncan,
                   His silver skin laced with his golden blood;
23110              And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature
                   For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers,
                   Steeped in the colours of their trade, their daggers
                   Unmannerly breached with gore.  Who could refrain,
                   That had a heart to love, and in that heart
                   Courage, to make 's love known?
   Lady Macbeth    [Fainting]                         Help me hence, ho!
        Macduff    Look to the lady.

        Malcolm    [aside to Donalbain]     Why do we hold our tongues,
                   That most may claim this argument for ours?
      Donalbain    What should be spoken here, where our fate,
23120              Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?
                   Let's away;
                   Our tears are not yet brewed.
        Malcolm                                   Nor our strong sorrow
                   Upon the foot of motions.
         Banquo                               Look to the lady:--

                          Lady Macbeth is carried out.

                   And when we have our naked frailties hid,
                   That suffer in exposure, let us meet,
                   And question this most bloody piece of work,
                   To know it further.  Fears and scruples shake us:
                   In the great hand of God I stand; and thence
                   Against the undivulged pretence I fight
                   Of treasonous malice.
        Macduff                           And so do I.
23130       All                                         So all.
        Macbeth    Let 's briefly put on manly readiness,
                   And meet i' the hall together.
            All                                    Well contented.

                     Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain

        Malcolm    What will you do?  Let 's not consort with them:
                   To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
                   Which the false man does easy.  I 'll to England.
      Donalbain    To Ireland, I: our separated fortune
                   Shall keep us both the safer; where we are
                   There 's daggers in men's smiles the near in blood,
                   The nearer bloody.
       Malcolm                        This murderous shaft that 's shot
23140              Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
                   Is to avoid the aim: therfore, to horse,
                   And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
                   But shift away.  There 's warrant in that theft
                   Which steals itself, when there 's no mercy left.

                                    Exeunt.



                                   Scene iv

                              Outside the Castle.

                           Enter Ross and an Old Man.


241     Old Man    Threescore and ten I can remember well;
                   Within the volume of which time I have seen
                   Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
                   Hath trifled former knowings.
           Ross                                   Ha, good father,
                   Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
                   Threatens his bloody stage: by the clock 't is day,
                   And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
                   Is 't night's predominance, not the day's shame,
                   That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
                   When living light should kiss it?
2410    Old Man                                      'T is unnatural,
                   Even like the deed that 's done.  On Tuesday last,
                   A falcon, towering in her pride of place,
                   Was by a mousing owl hawked at, and killed.
           Ross    And Duncan's horses (a thing most strange and certain)
                   Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
                   Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
                   Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make
                   War with mankind.
        Old Man                      'T is said, they ate each other.
           Ross    They did so, to th' amazement of mine eyes,
                   That looked upon 't--

                                   Enter Macduff

2420                                       Here comes the good Macduff.--
                   How goes the world, Sir, now?
        Macduff                                   Why, see you not?
           Ross    Is 't known, who did this more than bloody deed?
        Macduff    Those that Macbeth hath slain.
           Ross                                    Alas, the day!
                   What good could they pretend?
        Macduff                                    They were suborned.
                   Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons,
                   Are stol'n away and fled; which puts upon them
                   Suspicion of the deed.
           Ross                           'Gainst nature still:
                   Thriftless Ambition, that wilt ravin up
                   Thine own life's means!--Then 't is most like
2430               The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
        Macduff    He is already named, and gone to Scone
                   To be invested.
           Ross                     Where is Duncan's body?
        Macduff    Carried to Colme-kill,
                   The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,
                   And guardian of their bones.
          Ross                                   Will you to Scone?
        Macduff    No, cousin; I 'll to Fife.
           Ross                                Well, I will thither.
        Macduff    Well, may you see things well done there:--adieu!--
                   Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!
           Ross    Farewell, father.
        Old Man    God's benison go with you; and with those
2440               That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!

                                                                                Exeunt






                                   ACT THREE

                                    Scene i

                         Forres. A room in the palace.

                                 Enter Banquo.


311      Banquo    Thou hast it now, King Cawdor, Glamis, all,
                   As the weird women promised; and, I fear,
                   Thou playst most foully for 't; yet it was said,
                   It should not stand in thy posterity;
                   But that myself should be the root and father
                   Of many kings.  If there come truth from them
                   (As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine),
                   Why, by the verities on thee made good,
                   May they not be my oracles as well,
3110               And set me up in hope?  But, hush; no more.


                                Sennet sounded.

                 Enter Macbeth as King; Lady Macbeth as Queen;
                      Lenox, Ross, Lords, and Attendants.


        Macbeth    Here 's our chief guest.
   Lady Macbeth                             If he had been forgotten,
                   It had been as a gap in our great feast,
                   And all-thing unbecoming.
        Macbeth    Tonight we hold a solemn supper, Sir,
                   And I 'll request your presence.
         Banquo                                      Let your highness
                   Command upon me, to the which my duties
                   Are with a most indissoluble tie
                   For ever knit.
        Macbeth    Ride you this afternoon?
         Banquo                              Ay, my good lord.
3120    Macbeth    We should have else desired your good advice
                   (Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)
                   In this day's council; but we 'll take tomorrow.
                   Is 't far you ride?
         Banquo    As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
                   'Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better,
                   I must become a borrower of the night
                   For a dark hour or twain.
        Macbeth                               Fail not our feast.
         Banquo    My lord, I will not.
        Macbeth    We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed
3130               In England and in Ireland; not confessing
                   Their cruel patricide, filling their hearers
                   With strange invention.  But of that tomorrow,
                   When, therewithal, we shall have cause of state
                   Craving us jointly.  Hie you to horse; adieu,
                   Till you return at night.  Goes Fleance with you?
         Banquo    Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon 's.
        Macbeth    I wish your horse swift, and sure of foot;
                   And so I do commend you to their backs.
                   Farewell--

                                 Exit Banquo.

3140               Let every man be master of his time
                   Till seven at night; to make society
                   The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
                   Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you.

                       Exeunt Lady Macbeth, Lords, etc.

                   [To an Attendant]
                   Sirrah, a word with you.  Attend those men
                   Our pleasure?
      Attendant                   They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
        Macbeth    Bring them before us.

                                Exit Attendant.

                                          --To be thus is nothing,
                   But to be safely thus.--Our fears in banquo
                   Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
3150               Reigns that which would be feared; 't is much he dares;
                   And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
                   He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
